---
layout: page-fullwidth
title: "Measuring Statistical Dispersion with the Gini Index"
subheadline: "Exploratory Data Analysis"
meta_teaser: "A blog post about Gini!"
teaser: "<em>A blog post about Gini!</em>"

header:
    image: birthday_planet_header.jpg
    background-color: "#999999"
    caption: "Voyager Montage by NASA. Public Domain. Credit: NASA."
    caption_url: https://www.nasa.gov/index.html
image:
    thumb: birthday_planet_thumb.jpg
    homepage: birthday_planet_header.jpg
    caption: "Credit: NASA"
    caption_url: https://www.nasa.gov/index.html
categories:
    - mathematics
    - eda
show_meta: true
comments: true
---
<!--more-->


Content for "abstract" including
- What is statistical dispersion?
- Metric developed by Gini
- UN uses it for ranking countries: wealth vs. income inequality
- I suggest expanding its use to be part of your EDA (measures overall statistical dispersion, yo!)

If you work with data long enough, you are bound to discover that calculating the average of a set of values rarely tells you the full story.  As a simple example, each of the following groups of people have the same average pay of $100:
- 100 people who make $100 each
- 50 people who make $150 each and 50 people who make $50
- 1 person who makes $10,000 and 99 people who make nothing

The primary difference among these groups is the way money is distributed among each of the 100 people.  The spread of money in this case is called [statistical dispersion][1], and there are many ways to measure this statistic.  Perhaps the most popular measurement of dispersion is standard deviation or variance.  Standard deviation roughly measures the distance between individual dataset values and the overall group mean. Standard deviation retains the same units as the quantity being measured, since we start with dollars in the previous example, standard deviation will also be reported in dollars.  But other unitless metrics can also be used to measure statistical dispersion.  One such quantity, Gini  



## Defining Gini
- Typical definition involving Lorenz curve
- Main idea: Area shrinks as curve pulls away from straight line
- Include approximation via Pareto principle?  (Or save for final takeaways?)

## Python 

- Libraries available
- Mathy definitions


## Baby Names Example

- Dataset
- Top names are all males which leads to theory of different statistical dispersion
- Measure Gini across time

## Healthcare Price Example

- Different procedures have different distributions -- need regulation or more transparency?

## Conclusion

- Recap of findings
- Pros and Cons of Gini
- Metric is lossy: exmaples of two distributions that have the same Gini values
- As with any metric, next step is WHY?  (Gini for nation's inequality can miss aging population, government assistance, etc.) 
Domain knowledge is critical!

[Check out this code on GitHub!](https://github.com/kimfetti/Blog/blob/master/planetary_birthday_problem.ipynb)  ||  [Check out this viz on Tableau!](https://public.tableau.com/profile/kimberly.fessel#!/vizhome/PlanetaryBirthdayProblem/Planets-50)

 [1]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Statistical_dispersion